<pre>
  BIP: N/A
  Title: FROST for BIP340-compatible Multi-Signatures
  Authors:
    Christopher Scott <cscottdev@protonmail.com>
  Status: Draft
  License: BSD-3-Clause
  Type: Informational
  Created: 2024-07-07
</pre>

== Introduction ==

=== Abstract ===

This document proposes a standard for the [https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/852.pdf FROST] multi-signature scheme and [https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9591.html RFC-9591] specification, with some modifications to the signature process in order to support [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki BIP340] public keys and signatures.

These modifications include:

* Specifying a domain for the BIP340 ciper-suite (secp256k1-bip340).
* Modifying the FROST challenge message to use the BIP340 challenge format.
* The use of x-only public keys, and possible negation for these keys during signing.
* The use of an x-only group public nonce, and possible negation for this nonce during signing.
* The ''tweaking'' of the aggregate signature, in order to create signatures for [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki BIP32] child keys and create key path signatures for [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0341.mediawiki BIP341] Taproot outputs with script paths.

Much of the standard for these modifications can be copied from [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0327.mediawiki BIP327], as MuSig2 and FROST follow a similar scheme for signing and aggregation.

=== Copyright ===

This document is licensed under the 3-clause BSD license.

=== Motivation ===

FROST is a t-of-n threshold Schnorr signature scheme. This scheme allows multiple signers with Shamir shares of a single aggregate public key, then create a Schnorr signature which is valid under the aggregate public key. This signature can be constructed using t-of-n participants, with t being the minimum number of n participants required to cooperate in order to produce a valid Schnorr signature.

The primary motivation of FROST is to create a standard for cooperatively constructing this multi-signature, with minimal network overhead during signing operations, and protection against known forgery attacks.

The FROST protocol has undergone multiple reviews and audits, received a final RFC specification, and has several production implementations available.

The benefit of using FROST mirrors that of MuSig2, in that the on-chain footprint of spending a FROST Taproot output is indistinguishable from a BIP340 Taproot key spend. In addition, FROST allows users to use a t-of-n threshold signing quorum, as opposed to an n-of-n multi-signature quorum with MuSig2.

Another benefit of using FROST being a Shamir based scheme, is that t-of-n participants can collaborate on recomputing the ''shares'' of the aggregate public key, while retaining the same public key. This allows for the addition, removal, and replacement of participants, plus changes to the threshold, without having to update the aggregate public key or its Taproot output on-chain.

The specifications for creating and updating shares of an aggregate public key are outside the scope of this document.

It should be noted that a key disadvantage with using FROST versus MuSig2 is that participants cannot provide their own public key when constructing the aggregate public key (and correspondingly, key aggregation cannot be done offline). This is because the process for generating ''shares'' of the group secret will determine the public key used by each participant.

== Specification ==

=== 1. RFC Introduction ===

This specification is based on the RFC-9591 specification, with some modifications provided by the BIP-327 specification. Any notable changes to the RFC-9591 specification will be highlighted.

The original RFC document specifies the Flexible Round-Optimized Schnorr Threshold (FROST) signing protocol based on original work in [FROST20]. FROST requires two rounds to compute a signature. Key generation for FROST signing is out of scope for this document.

=== 2. Conventions and Definitions ===

The following notation is used throughout the document.

'''byte:''' A sequence of eight bits.

'''random_bytes(n):''' Outputs n bytes, sampled uniformly at random using a cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator (CSPRNG).

'''count(i, L):''' Outputs the number of times the element i is represented in the list L.

'''len(l):''' Outputs the length of list l, e.g., len([1,2,3]) = 3.

'''reverse(l):'''  Outputs the list l in reverse order, e.g., reverse([1,2,3]) = [3,2,1].

'''range(a, b):''' Outputs a list of integers from a to b-1 in ascending order, e.g., range(1, 4) = [1,2,3].

'''pow(a, b):'''  Outputs the result, a Scalar, of a to the power of b, e.g., pow(2, 3) = 8 modulo the relevant group order p.

'''||:''' Denotes concatenation of byte strings, i.e., x || y denotes the byte string x, immediately followed by the byte string y, with no extra separator, yielding xy.

'''nil:''' Denotes an empty byte string.

Unless otherwise stated, we assume that secrets are sampled uniformly at random using a CSPRNG; see [RFC4086] for additional guidance on the generation of random numbers.

=== 3. Cryptographic Dependencies ===

FROST signing depends on the following cryptographic constructs:

* Prime-order group (Section 3.1)

* Cryptographic hash function (Section 3.2)

==== 3.1 Prime-Order Group ====

FROST depends on an abelian group of prime order p. We represent this group as the object G that additionally defines helper functions described below. The group operation for G is addition + with identity element I. For any elements A and B of the group G, A + B = B + A is also a member of G. Also, for any A in G, there exists an element -A such that A + (-A) = (-A) + A = I. For convenience, we use - to denote subtraction, e.g., A - B = A + (-B). Integers, taken modulo the group order p, are called "Scalars"; arithmetic operations on Scalars are implicitly performed modulo p. Since p is prime, Scalars form a finite field. Scalar multiplication is equivalent to the repeated application of the group operation on an element A with itself r-1 times, denoted as ScalarMult(A, r). We denote the sum, difference, and product of two Scalars using the +, -, and * operators, respectively. (Note that this means + may refer to group element addition or Scalar addition, depending on the type of the operands.) For any element A, ScalarMult(A, p) = I. We denote B as a fixed generator of the group. Scalar base multiplication is equivalent to the repeated application of the group operation on B with itself r-1 times, denoted as ScalarBaseMult(r). The set of Scalars corresponds to GF(p), which we refer to as the Scalar field. It is assumed that group element addition, negation, and equality comparison can be efficiently computed for arbitrary group elements.

This document uses types Element and Scalar to denote elements of the group G and its set of Scalars, respectively. We denote Scalar(x) as the conversion of integer input x to the corresponding Scalar value with the same numeric value. For example, Scalar(1) yields a Scalar representing the value 1. Moreover, we use the type NonZeroScalar to denote a Scalar value that is not equal to zero, i.e., Scalar(0). We denote equality comparison of these types as == and assignment of values by =. When comparing Scalar values, e.g., for the purposes of sorting lists of Scalar values, the least nonnegative representation mod p is used.

We now detail a number of member functions that can be invoked on G.

Order():
Outputs the order of G (i.e., p).
Identity():
Outputs the identity Element of the group (i.e., I).
RandomScalar():
Outputs a random Scalar element in GF(p), i.e., a random Scalar in [0, p - 1].
ScalarMult(A, k):
Outputs the Scalar multiplication between Element A and Scalar k.
ScalarBaseMult(k):
Outputs the Scalar multiplication between Scalar k and the group generator B.
SerializeElement(A):
Maps an Element A to a canonical byte array buf of fixed length Ne. This function raises an error if A is the identity element of the group.
DeserializeElement(buf):
Attempts to map a byte array buf to an Element A and fails if the input is not the valid canonical byte representation of an element of the group. This function raises an error if deserialization fails or if A is the identity element of the group; see Section 6 for group-specific input validation steps.
SerializeScalar(s):
Maps a Scalar s to a canonical byte array buf of fixed length Ns.
DeserializeScalar(buf):
Attempts to map a byte array buf to a Scalar s. This function raises an error if deserialization fails; see Section 6 for group-specific input validation steps.

==== 3.2 Cryptographic Hash Function ====

FROST requires the use of a cryptographically secure hash function, generically written as H, which is modeled as a random oracle in security proofs for the protocol (see [FROST20] and [StrongerSec22]). For concrete recommendations on hash functions that SHOULD be used in practice, see Section 6. Using H, we introduce distinct domain-separated hashes H1, H2, H3, H4, and H5:

H1, H2, and H3 map arbitrary byte strings to Scalar elements associated with the prime-order group.
H4 and H5 are aliases for H with distinct domain separators.
The details of H1, H2, H3, H4, and H5 vary based on the ciphersuite used. See Section 6 for more details about each.

=== 4. Helper Functions ===

Beyond the core dependencies, the protocol in this document depends on the following helper operations:

Nonce generation (Section 4.1);
Polynomials (Section 4.2);
List operations (Section 4.3);
Binding factors computation (Section 4.4);
Group commitment computation (Section 4.5); and
Signature challenge computation (Section 4.6).
The following sections describe these operations in more detail.

==== 4.1 Nonce Generation ====

To hedge against a bad random number generator (RNG) that outputs predictable values, nonces are generated with the nonce_generate function by combining fresh randomness with the secret key as input to a domain-separated hash function built from the ciphersuite hash function H. This domain-separated hash function is denoted as H3. This function always samples 32 bytes of fresh randomness to ensure that the probability of nonce reuse is at most 2-128 as long as no more than 264 signatures are computed by a given signing participant.

<pre>
Inputs:
 - secret, a Scalar.
Outputs:
 - nonce, a Scalar.

def nonce_generate(secret):
  random_bytes = random_bytes(32)
  secret_enc = G.SerializeScalar(secret)
  return H3(random_bytes || secret_enc)
</pre>

==== 4.2 Polynomials ====

This section defines polynomials over Scalars that are used in the main protocol. A polynomial of maximum degree t is represented as a list of t+1 coefficients, where the constant term of the polynomial is in the first position and the highest-degree coefficient is in the last position. For example, the polynomial x2 + 2x + 3 has degree 2 and is represented as a list of three coefficients [3, 2, 1]. A point on the polynomial f is a tuple (x, y), where y = f(x).

The function derive_interpolating_value derives a value that is used for polynomial interpolation. It is provided a list of x-coordinates as input, each of which cannot equal 0.

<pre>
Inputs:
- L, the list of x-coordinates, each a NonZeroScalar.
- x_i, an x-coordinate contained in L, a NonZeroScalar.

Outputs:
- value, a Scalar.

Errors:
- "invalid parameters", if 1) x_i is not in L, or if 2) any
  x-coordinate is represented more than once in L.

def derive_interpolating_value(L, x_i):
  if x_i not in L:
    raise "invalid parameters"
  for x_j in L:
    if count(x_j, L) > 1:
      raise "invalid parameters"

  numerator = Scalar(1)
  denominator = Scalar(1)
  for x_j in L:
    if x_j == x_i: continue
    numerator *= x_j
    denominator *= x_j - x_i

  value = numerator / denominator
  return value
</pre>

==== 4.3 List Operations ====

This section describes helper functions that work on lists of values produced during the FROST protocol. The following function encodes a list of participant commitments into a byte string for use in the FROST protocol.

<pre>
Inputs:
- commitment_list = [(i, hiding_nonce_commitment_i,
  binding_nonce_commitment_i), ...], a list of commitments issued by
  each participant, where each element in the list indicates a
  NonZeroScalar identifier i and two commitment Element values
  (hiding_nonce_commitment_i, binding_nonce_commitment_i). This list
  MUST be sorted in ascending order by identifier.

Outputs:
- encoded_group_commitment, the serialized representation of
  commitment_list, a byte string.

def encode_group_commitment_list(commitment_list):
  encoded_group_commitment = nil
  for (identifier, hiding_nonce_commitment,
       binding_nonce_commitment) in commitment_list:
    encoded_commitment = (
        G.SerializeScalar(identifier) ||
        G.SerializeElement(hiding_nonce_commitment) ||
        G.SerializeElement(binding_nonce_commitment))
    encoded_group_commitment = (
        encoded_group_commitment ||
        encoded_commitment)
  return encoded_group_commitment
</pre>

The following function is used to extract identifiers from a commitment list.

<pre>
Inputs:
- commitment_list = [(i, hiding_nonce_commitment_i,
  binding_nonce_commitment_i), ...], a list of commitments issued by
  each participant, where each element in the list indicates a
  NonZeroScalar identifier i and two commitment Element values
  (hiding_nonce_commitment_i, binding_nonce_commitment_i). This list
  MUST be sorted in ascending order by identifier.

Outputs:
- identifiers, a list of NonZeroScalar values.

def participants_from_commitment_list(commitment_list):
  identifiers = []
  for (identifier, _, _) in commitment_list:
    identifiers.append(identifier)
  return identifiers
</pre>

The following function is used to extract a binding factor from a list of binding factors.

<pre>
Inputs:
- binding_factor_list = [(i, binding_factor), ...],
  a list of binding factors for each participant, where each element
  in the list indicates a NonZeroScalar identifier i and Scalar
  binding factor.
- identifier, participant identifier, a NonZeroScalar.

Outputs:
- binding_factor, a Scalar.

Errors:
- "invalid participant", when the designated participant is
  not known.

def binding_factor_for_participant(binding_factor_list, identifier):
  for (i, binding_factor) in binding_factor_list:
    if identifier == i:
      return binding_factor
  raise "invalid participant"
</pre>

==== 4.4 Binding Factors Computation ====

This section describes the subroutine for computing binding factors based on the participant commitment list, message to be signed, and group public key.

<pre>
Inputs:
- group_public_key, the public key corresponding to the group signing
  key, an Element.
- commitment_list = [(i, hiding_nonce_commitment_i,
  binding_nonce_commitment_i), ...], a list of commitments issued by
  each participant, where each element in the list indicates a
  NonZeroScalar identifier i and two commitment Element values
  (hiding_nonce_commitment_i, binding_nonce_commitment_i). This list
  MUST be sorted in ascending order by identifier.
- msg, the message to be signed.

Outputs:
- binding_factor_list, a list of (NonZeroScalar, Scalar) tuples
  representing the binding factors.

def compute_binding_factors(group_public_key, commitment_list, msg):
  group_public_key_enc = G.SerializeElement(group_public_key)
  // Hashed to a fixed length.
  msg_hash = H4(msg)
  // Hashed to a fixed length.
  encoded_commitment_hash =
      H5(encode_group_commitment_list(commitment_list))
  // The encoding of the group public key is a fixed length
  // within a ciphersuite.
  rho_input_prefix = group_public_key_enc || msg_hash ||
   encoded_commitment_hash

  binding_factor_list = []
  for (identifier, hiding_nonce_commitment,
       binding_nonce_commitment) in commitment_list:
    rho_input = rho_input_prefix || G.SerializeScalar(identifier)
    binding_factor = H1(rho_input)
    binding_factor_list.append((identifier, binding_factor))
  return binding_factor_list
</pre>

==== 4.5 Group Commitment Computation ====

This section describes the subroutine for creating the group commitment from a commitment list.

<pre>
Inputs:
- commitment_list = [(i, hiding_nonce_commitment_i,
  binding_nonce_commitment_i), ...], a list of commitments issued by
  each participant, where each element in the list indicates a
  NonZeroScalar identifier i and two commitment Element values
  (hiding_nonce_commitment_i, binding_nonce_commitment_i). This list
  MUST be sorted in ascending order by identifier.
- binding_factor_list = [(i, binding_factor), ...],
  a list of (NonZeroScalar, Scalar) tuples representing the binding
  factor Scalar for the given identifier.

Outputs:
- group_commitment, an Element.

def compute_group_commitment(commitment_list, binding_factor_list):
  group_commitment = G.Identity()
  for (identifier, hiding_nonce_commitment,
       binding_nonce_commitment) in commitment_list:
    binding_factor = binding_factor_for_participant(
        binding_factor_list, identifier)
    binding_nonce = G.ScalarMult(
        binding_nonce_commitment,
        binding_factor)
    group_commitment = (
        group_commitment +
        hiding_nonce_commitment +
        binding_nonce)
  return group_commitment
</pre>

Note that the performance of this algorithm is defined naively and scales linearly relative to the number of signers. For improved performance, the group commitment can be computed using multi-exponentiation techniques such as Pippinger's algorithm; see [MultExp] for more details.

==== 4.6 Signature Challenge Computation ====

This section describes the subroutine for creating the per-message challenge.

<pre>
Inputs:
- group_commitment, the group commitment, an Element.
- group_public_key, the public key corresponding to the group signing
  key, an Element.
- msg, the message to be signed, a byte string.

Outputs:
- challenge, a Scalar.

def compute_challenge(group_commitment, group_public_key, msg):
  group_comm_enc = G.SerializeElement(group_commitment)
  group_public_key_enc = G.SerializeElement(group_public_key)
  challenge_input = group_comm_enc || group_public_key_enc || msg
  challenge = H2(challenge_input)
  return challenge
</pre>

=== 5. Two-Round FROST Signing Protocol ===

This section describes the two-round FROST signing protocol for producing Schnorr signatures. The protocol is configured to run with a selection of NUM_PARTICIPANTS signer participants and a Coordinator. NUM_PARTICIPANTS is a positive and non-zero integer that MUST be at least MIN_PARTICIPANTS, but MUST NOT be larger than MAX_PARTICIPANTS, where MIN_PARTICIPANTS <= MAX_PARTICIPANTS and MIN_PARTICIPANTS is a positive and non-zero integer. Additionally, MAX_PARTICIPANTS MUST be a positive integer less than the group order. A signer participant, or simply "participant", is an entity that is trusted to hold and use a signing key share. The Coordinator is an entity with the following responsibilities:

1. Determining the participants that will participate (at least MIN_PARTICIPANTS in number);
2. Coordinating rounds (receiving and forwarding inputs among participants);
3. Aggregating signature shares output by each participant; and
4. Publishing the resulting signature.

FROST assumes that the Coordinator and the set of signer participants are chosen externally to the protocol. Note that it is possible to deploy the protocol without designating a single Coordinator; see Section 7.5 for more information.

FROST produces signatures that can be verified as if they were produced from a single signer using a signing key s with corresponding public key PK, where s is a Scalar value and PK = G.ScalarBaseMult(s). As a threshold signing protocol, the group signing key s is Shamir secret-shared amongst each of the MAX_PARTICIPANTS participants and is used to produce signatures; see Appendix C.1 for more information about Shamir secret sharing. In particular, FROST assumes each participant is configured with the following information:

An identifier, which is a NonZeroScalar value denoted as i in the range [1, MAX_PARTICIPANTS] and MUST be distinct from the identifier of every other participant.
A signing key sk_i, which is a Scalar value representing the i-th Shamir secret share of the group signing key s. In particular, sk_i is the value f(i) on a secret polynomial f of degree (MIN_PARTICIPANTS - 1), where s is f(0). The public key corresponding to this signing key share is PK_i = G.ScalarBaseMult(sk_i).
Additionally, the Coordinator and each participant are configured with common group information, denoted as "group info," which consists of the following:

Group public key, which is an Element in G denoted as PK.
Public keys PK_i for each participant, which are Element values in G denoted as PK_i for each i in [1, MAX_PARTICIPANTS].
This document does not specify how this information, including the signing key shares, are configured and distributed to participants. In general, two configuration mechanisms are possible: one that requires a single trusted dealer and one that requires performing a distributed key generation protocol. We highlight the key generation mechanism by a trusted dealer in Appendix C for reference.

FROST requires two rounds to complete. In the first round, participants generate and publish one-time-use commitments to be used in the second round. In the second round, each participant produces a share of the signature over the Coordinator-chosen message and the other participant commitments. After the second round is completed, the Coordinator aggregates the signature shares to produce a final signature. The Coordinator SHOULD abort the protocol if the signature is invalid; see Section 5.4 for more information about dealing with invalid signatures and misbehaving participants. This complete interaction (without being aborted) is shown in Figure 1.

<pre>
        (group info)            (group info,     (group info,
            |               signing key share)   signing key share)
            |                         |                |
            v                         v                v
        Coordinator               Signer-1   ...   Signer-n
    ------------------------------------------------------------
   signing request
------------>
            |
      == Round 1 (Commitment) ==
            | participant commitment |                 |
            |<-----------------------+                 |
            |          ...                             |
            | participant commitment            (commit state) ==\
            |<-----------------------------------------+         |
                                                                 |
      == Round 2 (Signature Share Generation) ==                 |
   message
------------>
            |                                                    |
            |   participant input    |                 |         |
            +------------------------>                 |         |
            |     signature share    |                 |         |
            |<-----------------------+                 |         |
            |          ...                             |         |
            |    participant input                     |         |
            +------------------------------------------>         /
            |     signature share                      |<=======/
            <------------------------------------------+
            |
      == Aggregation ==
            |
  signature |
<-----------+
</pre>
''Figure 1: FROST Protocol Overview''

Details for round one are described in Section 5.1 and details for round two are described in Section 5.2. Note that each participant persists some state between the two rounds; this state is deleted as described in Section 5.2. The final Aggregation step is described in Section 5.3.

FROST assumes that all inputs to each round, especially those that are received over the network, are validated before use. In particular, this means that any value of type Element or Scalar received over the network MUST be deserialized using DeserializeElement and DeserializeScalar, respectively, as these functions perform the necessary input validation steps. Additionally, all messages sent over the wire MUST be encoded using their respective functions, e.g., Scalars and Elements are encoded using SerializeScalar and SerializeElement.

FROST assumes reliable message delivery between the Coordinator and participants in order for the protocol to complete. An attacker masquerading as another participant will result only in an invalid signature; see Section 7. However, in order to identify misbehaving participants, we assume that the network channel is additionally authenticated; confidentiality is not required.

==== 5.1 Round One - Commitment ====

Round one involves each participant generating nonces and their corresponding public commitments. A nonce is a pair of Scalar values, and a commitment is a pair of Element values. Each participant's behavior in this round is described by the commit function below. Note that this function invokes nonce_generate twice, once for each type of nonce produced. The output of this function is a pair of secret nonces (hiding_nonce, binding_nonce) and their corresponding public commitments (hiding_nonce_commitment, binding_nonce_commitment).

<pre>
Inputs:
- sk_i, the secret key share, a Scalar.

Outputs:
- (nonce, comm), a tuple of nonce and nonce commitment pairs,
  where each value in the nonce pair is a Scalar and each value in
  the nonce commitment pair is an Element.

def commit(sk_i):
  hiding_nonce = nonce_generate(sk_i)
  binding_nonce = nonce_generate(sk_i)
  hiding_nonce_commitment = G.ScalarBaseMult(hiding_nonce)
  binding_nonce_commitment = G.ScalarBaseMult(binding_nonce)
  nonces = (hiding_nonce, binding_nonce)
  comms = (hiding_nonce_commitment, binding_nonce_commitment)
  return (nonces, comms)
</pre>

The outputs nonce and comm from participant P_i are both stored locally and kept for use in the second round. The nonce value is secret and MUST NOT be shared, whereas the public output comm is sent to the Coordinator. The nonce values produced by this function MUST NOT be used in more than one invocation of sign, and the nonces MUST be generated from a source of secure randomness.

==== 5.2 Round Two - Signature Share Generation ====

In round two, the Coordinator is responsible for sending the message to be signed and choosing the participants that will participate (a number of at least MIN_PARTICIPANTS). Signers additionally require locally held data, specifically their private key and the nonces corresponding to their commitment issued in round one.

The Coordinator begins by sending each participant the message to be signed along with the set of signing commitments for all participants in the participant list. Each participant MUST validate the inputs before processing the Coordinator's request. In particular, the signer MUST validate commitment_list, deserializing each group Element in the list using DeserializeElement from Section 3.1. If deserialization fails, the signer MUST abort the protocol. Moreover, each participant MUST ensure that its identifier and commitments (from the first round) appear in commitment_list. Applications that restrict participants from processing arbitrary input messages are also required to perform relevant application-layer input validation checks; see Section 7.7 for more details.

Upon receipt and successful input validation, each signer then runs the following procedure to produce its own signature share.

<pre>
Inputs:
- identifier, identifier i of the participant, a NonZeroScalar.
- sk_i, signer secret key share, a Scalar.
- group_public_key, public key corresponding to the group signing
  key, an Element.
- nonce_i, pair of Scalar values (hiding_nonce, binding_nonce)
  generated in round one.
- msg, the message to be signed, a byte string.
- commitment_list = [(i, hiding_nonce_commitment_i,
  binding_nonce_commitment_i), ...], a list of commitments issued by
  each participant, where each element in the list indicates a
  NonZeroScalar identifier i and two commitment Element values
  (hiding_nonce_commitment_i, binding_nonce_commitment_i). This list
  MUST be sorted in ascending order by identifier.


Outputs:
- sig_share, a signature share, a Scalar.

def sign(identifier, sk_i, group_public_key,
         nonce_i, msg, commitment_list):
  # Compute the binding factor(s)
  binding_factor_list = compute_binding_factors(group_public_key,
   commitment_list, msg)
  binding_factor = binding_factor_for_participant(
      binding_factor_list, identifier)

  # Compute the group commitment
  group_commitment = compute_group_commitment(
      commitment_list, binding_factor_list)

  # Compute the interpolating value
  participant_list = participants_from_commitment_list(
      commitment_list)
  lambda_i = derive_interpolating_value(participant_list, identifier)

  # Compute the per-message challenge
  challenge = compute_challenge(
      group_commitment, group_public_key, msg)

  # Compute the signature share
  (hiding_nonce, binding_nonce) = nonce_i
  sig_share = hiding_nonce + (binding_nonce * binding_factor) +
      (lambda_i * sk_i * challenge)

  return sig_share
</pre>

The output of this procedure is a signature share. Each participant sends these shares back to the Coordinator. Each participant MUST delete the nonce and corresponding commitment after completing sign and MUST NOT use the nonce as input more than once to sign.

Note that the lambda_i value derived during this procedure does not change across FROST signing operations for the same signing group. As such, participants can compute it once and store it for reuse across signing sessions.

==== 5.3 Signature Share Aggregation ====

After participants perform round two and send their signature shares to the Coordinator, the Coordinator aggregates each share to produce a final signature. Before aggregating, the Coordinator MUST validate each signature share using DeserializeScalar. If validation fails, the Coordinator MUST abort the protocol, as the resulting signature will be invalid. If all signature shares are valid, the Coordinator aggregates them to produce the final signature using the following procedure.

<pre>
Inputs:
- commitment_list = [(i, hiding_nonce_commitment_i,
  binding_nonce_commitment_i), ...], a list of commitments issued by
  each participant, where each element in the list indicates a
  NonZeroScalar identifier i and two commitment Element values
  (hiding_nonce_commitment_i, binding_nonce_commitment_i). This list
  MUST be sorted in ascending order by identifier.
- msg, the message to be signed, a byte string.
- group_public_key, public key corresponding to the group signing
  key, an Element.
- sig_shares, a set of signature shares z_i, Scalar values, for each
  participant, of length NUM_PARTICIPANTS, where
  MIN_PARTICIPANTS <= NUM_PARTICIPANTS <= MAX_PARTICIPANTS.

Outputs:
- (R, z), a Schnorr signature consisting of an Element R and
  Scalar z.

def aggregate(commitment_list, msg, group_public_key, sig_shares):
  # Compute the binding factors
  binding_factor_list = compute_binding_factors(group_public_key,
   commitment_list, msg)

  # Compute the group commitment
  group_commitment = compute_group_commitment(
      commitment_list, binding_factor_list)

  # Compute aggregated signature
  z = Scalar(0)
  for z_i in sig_shares:
    z = z + z_i
  return (group_commitment, z)
</pre>

The output from the aggregation step is the output signature (R, z). The canonical encoding of this signature is specified in Section 6.

The Coordinator SHOULD verify this signature using the group public key before publishing or releasing the signature. Signature verification is as specified for the corresponding ciphersuite; see Section 6 for details. The aggregate signature will verify successfully if all signature shares are valid. Moreover, subsets of valid signature shares will not yield a valid aggregate signature themselves.

If the aggregate signature verification fails, the Coordinator MAY verify each signature share individually to identify and act on misbehaving participants. The mechanism for acting on a misbehaving participant is out of scope for this specification; see Section 5.4 for more information about dealing with invalid signatures and misbehaving participants.

The function for verifying a signature share, denoted as verify_signature_share, is described below. Recall that the Coordinator is configured with "group info" that contains the group public key PK and public keys PK_i for each participant. The group_public_key and PK_i function arguments MUST come from that previously stored group info.

<pre>
Inputs:
- identifier, identifier i of the participant, a NonZeroScalar.
- PK_i, the public key for the i-th participant, where
  PK_i = G.ScalarBaseMult(sk_i), an Element.
- comm_i, pair of Element values in G
  (hiding_nonce_commitment, binding_nonce_commitment) generated in
  round one from the i-th participant.
- sig_share_i, a Scalar value indicating the signature share as
  produced in round two from the i-th participant.
- commitment_list = [(i, hiding_nonce_commitment_i,
  binding_nonce_commitment_i), ...], a list of commitments issued by
  each participant, where each element in the list indicates a
  NonZeroScalar identifier i and two commitment Element values
  (hiding_nonce_commitment_i, binding_nonce_commitment_i). This list
  MUST be sorted in ascending order by identifier.
- group_public_key, public key corresponding to the group signing
  key, an Element.
- msg, the message to be signed, a byte string.

Outputs:
- True if the signature share is valid, and False otherwise.

def verify_signature_share(
        identifier, PK_i, comm_i, sig_share_i, commitment_list,
        group_public_key, msg):
  # Compute the binding factors
  binding_factor_list = compute_binding_factors(group_public_key,
   commitment_list, msg)
  binding_factor = binding_factor_for_participant(
      binding_factor_list, identifier)

  # Compute the group commitment
  group_commitment = compute_group_commitment(
      commitment_list, binding_factor_list)

  # Compute the commitment share
  (hiding_nonce_commitment, binding_nonce_commitment) = comm_i
  comm_share = hiding_nonce_commitment + G.ScalarMult(
      binding_nonce_commitment, binding_factor)

  # Compute the challenge
  challenge = compute_challenge(
      group_commitment, group_public_key, msg)

  # Compute the interpolating value
  participant_list = participants_from_commitment_list(
      commitment_list)
  lambda_i = derive_interpolating_value(participant_list, identifier)

  # Compute relation values
  l = G.ScalarBaseMult(sig_share_i)
  r = comm_share + G.ScalarMult(PK_i, challenge * lambda_i)

  return l == r
</pre>

The Coordinator can verify each signature share before aggregating and verifying the signature under the group public key. However, since the aggregate signature is valid if all signature shares are valid, this order of operations is more expensive if the signature is valid.

==== 5.4 Identifiable Abort ====

FROST does not provide robustness; i.e, all participants are required to complete the protocol honestly in order to generate a valid signature. When the signing protocol does not produce a valid signature, the Coordinator SHOULD abort; see Section 7 for more information about FROST's security properties and the threat model.

As a result of this property, a misbehaving participant can cause a denial of service (DoS) on the signing protocol by contributing malformed signature shares or refusing to participate. Identifying misbehaving participants that produce invalid shares can be done by checking signature shares from each participant using verify_signature_share as described in Section 5.3. FROST assumes the network channel is authenticated to identify the signer that misbehaved. FROST allows for identifying misbehaving participants that produce invalid signature shares as described in Section 5.3. FROST does not provide accommodations for identifying participants that refuse to participate, though applications are assumed to detect when participants fail to engage in the signing protocol.

In both cases, preventing this type of attack requires the Coordinator to identify misbehaving participants such that applications can take corrective action. The mechanism for acting on misbehaving participants is out of scope for this specification. However, one reasonable approach would be to remove the misbehaving participant from the set of allowed participants in future runs of FROST.

> TODO: Mention ROAST here?

=== 6. CipherSuite ===

A FROST ciphersuite must specify the underlying prime-order group details and cryptographic hash function. Each ciphersuite is denoted as (Group, Hash), e.g., (ristretto255, SHA-512). This section contains some ciphersuites. Each ciphersuite also includes a context string, denoted as contextString, which is an ASCII string literal (with no terminating NUL character).

<s>The RECOMMENDED ciphersuite is (ristretto255, SHA-512) as described in Section 6.2. The (Ed25519, SHA-512) and (Ed448, SHAKE256) ciphersuites are included for compatibility with Ed25519 and Ed448 as defined in [RFC8032].</s>

> TODO: We need to specialize this for secp256k1 + sha256 + domain for BIP340.

The DeserializeElement and DeserializeScalar functions instantiated for a particular prime-order group corresponding to a ciphersuite MUST adhere to the description in Section 3.1. Validation steps for these functions are described for each of the ciphersuites below. Future ciphersuites MUST describe how input validation is done for DeserializeElement and DeserializeScalar.

Each ciphersuite includes explicit instructions for verifying signatures produced by FROST. Note that these instructions are equivalent to those produced by a single participant.

Each ciphersuite adheres to the requirements in Section 6.6. Future ciphersuites MUST also adhere to these requirements.

Future documents that introduce new ciphersuites MUST adhere to the following requirements.

H1, H2, and H3 all have output distributions that are close to (indistinguishable from) the uniform distribution.

All hash functions MUST be domain-separated with a per-suite context string. Note that the FROST(Ed25519, SHA-512) ciphersuite does not adhere to this requirement for H2 alone in order to maintain compatibility with [RFC8032].

The group MUST be of prime order and all deserialization functions MUST output elements that belong to their respective sets of Elements or Scalars, or else fail.

The canonical signature encoding details are clearly specified.

==== 6.1 FROST-BIP340 (secp256k1, SHA-256) ====

This ciphersuite uses secp256k1 for the Group and SHA-256 for the hash function H. The value of the contextString parameter is "FROST-secp256k1-SHA256-v1".

Group:
secp256k1 [SEC2], where Ne = 33 and Ns = 32.

Order():
Return 0xfffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffebaaedce6af48a03bbfd25e8cd0364141.
Identity():
As defined in [SEC2].
RandomScalar():
Implemented by returning a uniformly random Scalar in the range [0, G.Order() - 1]. Refer to Appendix D for implementation guidance.
SerializeElement(A):
Implemented using the compressed Elliptic-Curve-Point-to-Octet-String method according to [SEC1], yielding a 33-byte output. Additionally, this function validates that the input element is not the group identity element.
DeserializeElement(buf):
Implemented by attempting to deserialize a 33-byte input string to a public key using the compressed Octet-String-to-Elliptic-Curve-Point method according to [SEC1] and then performing public key validation as defined in Section 3.2.2.1 of [SEC1]. This includes checking that the coordinates of the resulting point are in the correct range, the point is on the curve, and the point is not the point at infinity. (As noted in the specification, validation of the point order is not required since the cofactor is 1.) If any of these checks fail, deserialization returns an error.
SerializeScalar(s):
Implemented using the Field-Element-to-Octet-String conversion according to [SEC1].
DeserializeScalar(buf):
Implemented by attempting to deserialize a Scalar from a 32-byte string using Octet-String-to-Field-Element from [SEC1]. This function can fail if the input does not represent a Scalar in the range [0, G.Order() - 1].
Hash (H):
SHA-256, which has 32 bytes of output.

H1(m):
Implemented as hash_to_field(m, 1) (see [HASH-TO-CURVE], Section 5.2) using expand_message_xmd with SHA-256 with parameters DST = contextString || "rho", F set to the Scalar field, p set to G.Order(), m = 1, and L = 48.
H2(m):
Implemented as hash_to_field(m, 1) (see [HASH-TO-CURVE], Section 5.2) using expand_message_xmd with SHA-256 with parameters DST = contextString || "chal", F set to the Scalar field, p set to G.Order(), m = 1, and L = 48.
H3(m):
Implemented as hash_to_field(m, 1) (see [HASH-TO-CURVE], Section 5.2) using expand_message_xmd with SHA-256 with parameters DST = contextString || "nonce", F set to the Scalar field, p set to G.Order(), m = 1, and L = 48.
H4(m):
Implemented by computing H(contextString || "msg" || m).
H5(m):
Implemented by computing H(contextString || "com" || m).
Signature verification is as specified in Appendix B.

Canonical signature encoding is as specified in Appendix A.

== Security Considerations ==

A security analysis of FROST is documented in [FROST20] and [StrongerSec22]. At a high level, FROST provides security against Existential Unforgeability Under Chosen Message Attacks (EUF-CMA) as defined in [StrongerSec22]. To satisfy this requirement, the ciphersuite needs to adhere to the requirements in Section 6.6 and the following assumptions must hold.

The signer key shares are generated and distributed securely, e.g., via a trusted dealer that performs key generation (see Appendix C.2) or through a distributed key generation protocol.
The Coordinator and at most (MIN_PARTICIPANTS-1) participants may be corrupted.
Note that the Coordinator is not trusted with any private information, and communication at the time of signing can be performed over a public channel as long as it is authenticated and reliable.

FROST provides security against DoS attacks under the following assumptions:

The Coordinator does not perform a DoS attack.
The Coordinator identifies misbehaving participants such that they can be removed from future invocations of FROST. The Coordinator may also abort upon detecting a misbehaving participant to ensure that invalid signatures are not produced.
FROST does not aim to achieve the following goals:

Post-quantum security. FROST, like plain Schnorr signatures, requires the hardness of the Discrete Logarithm Problem.
Robustness. Preventing DoS attacks against misbehaving participants requires the Coordinator to identify and act on misbehaving participants; see Section 5.4 for more information. While FROST does not provide robustness, [ROAST] is a wrapper protocol around FROST that does.
Downgrade prevention. All participants in the protocol are assumed to agree on which algorithms to use.
Metadata protection. If protection for metadata is desired, a higher-level communication channel can be used to facilitate key generation and signing.

The rest of this section documents issues particular to implementations or deployments.

> TODO: Summarize the above, and link to the rest in the RFC.

== Appendix ==

> TODO: The schnorr signature generation and and verification should be a part of the main spec.

> TODO: Examples for trusted dealer, pedersen DKG, and others (ChillDKG?) should be included or referenced in the appendix.

> TODO: Key Generation / Dealing should maybe get its own section?

== Backwards Compatibility ==

This document proposes a standard for the FROST multi-signature scheme that is compatible with [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki BIP340].

FROST is ''not'' compatible with ECDSA signatures traditionally used in Bitcoin.

== Footnotes ==

== References ==

FROST: Flexible Round-Optimized Schnorr Threshold Signatures
https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/852.pdf

RFC-9591: The Flexible Round-Optimized Schnorr Threshold (FROST) Protocol for Two‑Round Schnorr Signatures.
https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9591

BIP-327: MuSig2 for BIP340-compatible Multi-Signatures
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0327.mediawiki 


== Acknowledgements ==


== Change Log ==

